
A brief description of the demonstrations and their controls. 

These "demonstrations" are full-scale applications that have been
built using Maverik and are available as a separate package
(maverik-demos) that you can download. We separate these out to keep
the main Maverik distribution a reasonable size. They are included to
(hopefully) demonstrate what Maverik is capable of rather than to act
as a tutorial to the system, which is the job of the examples which
are part of the main Maverik distribution.

Without 3D hardware acceleration (e.g. a GeForce card or SGI machine),
these demonstrations will not run at interactive speeds. To see what
they run like on a PC with 3D acceleration, download the movies from
the Maverik applications gallery - http://aig.cs.man.ac.uk/gallery/index.htm

If, after their initial automatic compilation, you wish to re-compile
these demos, see the note at the bottom of the page regarding their
Makefile.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

LegibleCity - An original piece of artwork by Prof. Jeffrey Shaw of ZKM
              http://www.zkm.de/

legiblecity:
  command line argument - name of city (amsterdam, manhattan, or karlsruhe) 
  h - lists controls
  standard mouse navigation

legiblecity2:
  m - jump to Manhattan
  a - jump to Amsterdam
  k - jump to Karlsruhe
  t - toggle drawing map
  standard mouse navigation

We wish to thank Prof Shaw for permission to distribute this work and
to all at ZKM who implemented it.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

EscapeCity - The Escape Cityscape

The Escape Cityscape is one of the two thematic places in which
"places meet". It will be used to house other projects within its
buildings, as a means of investigating large scale and complex virtual
environments, and as an arena for conducting studies into the
interaction of multiple users with virtual reality applications.
More information about the Escape project can be found at 
http://aig.cs.man.ac.uk/research/escape/index.html

Controls:
  c - toggle culling
  x - increase fog distance
  z - decrease fog distance
  w - toggle wireframe
  i - toggle timing information
  standard mouse navigation

Starting this application with the command line argument "1" will
cause it to time a fixed route.

----------------------------------------------------------------------
 
AIGLab - A radiositized model the AIG's lab.

This model was produced using VRAD, see http://www.cs.man.ac.uk/~gibsons/

The only controls are standard mouse navigation. Try pressing Shift-F8 to
view the model in wireframe.

----------------------------------------------------------------------



Compilation issue
-----------------

Some of these demos make explicit calls to OpenGL routines rather than
going through Maverik's abstracted graphics layer. The Makefiles for
the demos use the OPENGLINCL and OPENGLLIBS environment variables to
indicate where to find the OpenGL include files and how to link with
the libraries. Both of these environment variables are correctly set
for you when the demos are automatically compiled.

Cygwin users: you need to re-execute the Maverik "setup" script in the
top level directory if you have downloaded the demos after you have
compiled the main Maverik distribution.
