\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c Copyright (c) 1998 by Georg C. F.  Greve <greve@gnu.org>
@c
@c %**start of header
@setfilename xlogmaster_faq.info
@settitle Frequently asked questions about the Xlogmaster
@setchapternewpage off
@c %**end of header

@set EDITION 0.5
@set UPDATED 24.8.1998

@titlepage
@title Xlogmaster FAQ
@subtitle Frequently asked questions about the Xlogmaster
@subtitle Last Modified: @value{UPDATED}
@sp 1
@author Georg C. F. Greve <greve@@gnu.org>
@page
@end titlepage

@ifinfo
@node Top, 1. Introductory Questions, (dir), (dir)
@unnumbered Xlogmaster FAQ

@*
Archive-name: xlogmaster-faq@*
Last Modified: @value{UPDATED}@*
Edition: @value{EDITION}@*
URL1: http://www.gnu.org/software/xlogmaster/xlogmaster.html@*
@sp 1
Current-Editor: Georg C. F. Greve <greve@@gnu.org>@*
@sp 1
Copying Status: Freely Redistributable.  I take no liability for the
correctness and safety of any procedures or advice given
here.  This FAQ is distributed in the hope that it will
be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the
implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
@sp 1
This is a list of frequently asked questions for Xlogmaster users and
maintainers. 

@end ifinfo

@menu
* 1. Introductory Questions::   
* 2. Compiling the Xlogmaster::  
@end menu





@node 1. Introductory Questions, 2. Compiling the Xlogmaster, Top, Top
@chapter 1. Introductory Questions

@menu
* 1.1::                         1.1. Preface
* 1.2::                         1.2. What is the Xlogmaster ?
* 1.3::                         1.3. What is the current version of the Xlogmaster ?
* 1.4::                         1.4. Where can I find it?
* 1.5::                         1.5. Where can I get help for using the Xlogmaster ?
@end menu

@node 1.1, 1.2, 1. Introductory Questions, 1. Introductory Questions
@section 1.1. Preface

This is the introduction to a list of frequently asked questions (FAQ's)
about the Xlogmaster with answers.  This article contains a listing of the
questions; subsequent articles contain the questions and answers.

If you know the answer of a question is in the FAQ list, please reply to
the question by e-mail instead of posting.  Help reduce noise!

Please suggest new questions, answers, wording changes, deletions, etc.
The most helpful form for suggestions is a context diff (i.e. the output
of @samp{diff -c}).  Include @samp{FAQ} in the subject of messages sent
to me about the FAQ list.

Please do not send questions to me just because you do not want to
disturb a lot of people and you think I would know the answer.  I do
not have time to answer questions individually and keep up with
everything else I have to get done. Questions to me that have been
answered before slow down development and that is bad for everyone.


@node 1.2, 1.3, 1.1, 1. Introductory Questions
@section 1.2. What is the Xlogmaster ?

The Xlogmaster is a GTK+ (see the GIMP tookit page under
http://www.gimp.org/ for more information) based program that helps you
to monitor all kinds of system activity. It allows monitoring and
background surveillance of all logfiles and devices that allow being
read by @code{cat} like the @file{/proc} devices. You can configure the
Xlogmaster graphically to take almost any action you can think of upon
certain events and it can certainly help you keeping track of everything
and increasing system security.


@node 1.3, 1.4, 1.2, 1. Introductory Questions
@section 1.3. What is the current version of the Xlogmaster ?

The current version is 1.4.3, released on August 24. 1998.


@node 1.4, 1.5, 1.3, 1. Introductory Questions
@section 1.4. Where can I find it?

The source can be found via anonymous FTP at
@ifinfo
@file{ftp.gnu.org:/pub/gnu/}.
@end ifinfo
@ifhtml
<A HREF="ftp://ftp.gnu.org/pub/gnu/">ftp.gnu.org:/pub/gnu/</A>
@end ifhtml
@iftex
@file{ftp.gnu.org:/pub/gnu/}.
@end iftex

@node 1.5,  , 1.4, 1. Introductory Questions
@section 1.5. Where can I get help for using the Xlogmaster ?

If you installed everything correctly the easiest ways are probably
@table @bullet
@item
the tutorial that should be in your info tree. Otherwise you can find it
in the @file{doc} directory of the distribution
@item
the manpage.
@item
executing the Xlogmaster via @code{xlogmaster --help}
@end table
Other ways are to check out the homepage at
@table @bullet
@ifinfo
@file{http://www.gnu.org/software/xlogmaster/xlogmaster.html}
@end ifinfo
@ifhtml
<A HREF="http://www.gnu.org/software/xlogmaster/xlogmaster.html">http://www.gnu.org/software/xlogmaster/xlogmaster.html</A>
@end ifhtml
@iftex
@file{http://www.gnu.org/software/xlogmaster/xlogmaster.html}
@end iftex
@end table
or the mailinglists
@table @bullet
@item
@ifinfo
@file{beta-xlogmaster@@gnu.org}
@end ifinfo
@ifhtml
<A HREF="mailto:beta-xlogmaster@@gnu.org">beta-xlogmaster@@gnu.org</A>
@end ifhtml
@iftex
@file{beta-xlogmaster@@gnu.org}
@end iftex
@sp 1
Subscription is done by sending a mail to@*
@ifinfo
@file{beta-xlogmaster-request@@gnu.org}
@end ifinfo
@ifhtml
<A HREF="mailto:beta-xlogmaster-request@@gnu.org">beta-xlogmaster-request@@gnu.org</A>
@end ifhtml
@iftex
@file{beta-xlogmaster-request@@gnu.org}
@end iftex
@* leave the @emph{subject} blank and enter @samp{subscribe} in the @emph{body}.
@item
@ifinfo
@file{help-xlogmaster@@gnu.org}
@end ifinfo
@ifhtml
<A HREF="mailto:help-xlogmaster@@gnu.org">help-xlogmaster@@gnu.org</A>
@end ifhtml
@iftex
@file{help-xlogmaster@@gnu.org}
@end iftex
@sp 1
Subscription is done by sending a mail to@*
@ifinfo
@file{help-xlogmaster-request@@gnu.org}
@end ifinfo
@ifhtml
<A HREF="mailto:help-xlogmaster-request@@gnu.org">help-xlogmaster-request@@gnu.org</A>
@end ifhtml
@iftex
@file{help-xlogmaster-request@@gnu.org}
@end iftex
@* leave the @emph{subject} blank and enter @samp{subscribe} in the @emph{body}.
@end table


@node 2. Compiling the Xlogmaster,  , 1. Introductory Questions, Top
@chapter 2. Compiling the Xlogmaster

@menu
* 2.1::                         2.1. Normal installation
* 2.2::                         2.2. Make doesn't seem to understand the Makefiles
@end menu

@node 2.1, 2.2, 2. Compiling the Xlogmaster, 2. Compiling the Xlogmaster
@section 2.1. Normal installation

Normal installation is done by unpacking the archive and then entering
it. @code{./configure ; make ; make install} should do everything
then. The default is to install it into the @file{/usr/local}
structure. If you want to change that and for other configuration
options, please see @code{./configure --help}.


@node 2.2,  , 2.1, 2. Compiling the Xlogmaster
@section 2.2. Make doesn't seem to understand the Makefiles

This can happen on some systems (especiall SunOS or old Solaris ones) --
the problem is easily fixed by using @code{gmake} instead of @code{make}.






@page     
@contents
@bye
