.TH BOOL 1 \*(Dt "GNU Project"
.SH NAME
bool \- print context matching a boolean expression
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bool
.RI [ options ]
.I EXPRESSION
.RI [ FILE .\|.\|.]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B Bool
searches the named input
.IR FILE s
(or standard input if the file name
.B \-
is given) for the context of each pattern in the given
.IR EXPRESSION .
If the input is HTML formatted, it is parsed and queried in a single pass.
.PP
By default,
.B bool
prints the first occurrence of each pattern in its context if the
.IR EXPRESSION
is true.  This consists of up to 60 characters preceding and following
the pattern, until a beginning or end of paragraph is reached.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\^\-byte-offset
Print the byte offset where the match occurred before each line of output.
.TP
.BI \-C " NUM" "\fR,\fP \-\^\-context=" NUM
Print
.I NUM
characters (default 60) of output context for each pattern.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\^\-count
Suppress normal output; instead print a count of matching patterns for
each input file.
.TP
.BI \-D " NUM" "\fR,\fP \-\^\-distance=" NUM
Find patterns separated by
.I NUM
words (default 10) when using the NEAR operator.
.TP
.BR \-F ", " \-\^\-fixed-string
Interpret
.I EXPRESSION
as a fixed string instead of a boolean expression.
.TP
.BR \-H ", " \-\^\-with-filename
Print the filename for each match.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\^\-no-filename
Suppress the prefixing of filenames on output when multiple files are
searched.
.TP
.BR \-\^\-help
Output a brief help message.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\^\-ignore-case
Ignore case distinctions in both the
.I EXPRESSION
and the input files.
.TP
.BR \-L ", " \-\^\-files-without-match
Suppress normal output; instead print the name of each input file from
which no output would normally have been printed.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\^\-files-with-matches
Suppress normal output; instead print the name of each input file from
which output would normally have been printed.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\^\-line-number
Prefix each line of output with the line number within its input file.
.TP
.BI \-O " NUM" "\fR,\fP \-\^\-occurrences=" NUM
Print
.I NUM
lines (default 1) of context for each pattern.  No output is printed if
the boolean expression evaluates to false.
.TP
.BR \-P ", " \-\^\-with-pattern
Print the pattern for each match.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\^\-no-pattern
Suppress the prefixing of patterns on output.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\^\-quiet ", " \-\^\-silent
Quiet;  suppress  normal output.  Also see the -s or --no-messages
option below.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\^\-no-messages
Suppress error messages about nonexistent or unreadable files.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\^\-version
Print the version number of
.B bool
to standard error.  This version number should be included in all bug
reports (see below).
.SH BOOLEAN EXPRESSION
.PP
A boolean expression is composed of operands separated by operators.
The precedence of operators is evaluated from left to right.
.PP
Operands can be another boolean expression isolated between parentheses or
a pattern.  The latter is expressed as a sequence of characters delimited
by spaces or enclosed in quotes.  Some characters can be escaped using
the backslash ('\\'), other characters can be specified as SGML entities.
.PP
An operand must return a truth value.  For a parenthesized expression,
each operator within the expression is evaluated as described below.
For a pattern, the operand is true if there are one or more occurrences of
the sequence of characters in the input.  Otherwise, the operand is false.
.PP
Operators are symbols denoting the logic to be performed.  The AND
operator returns true if the operands on either side of the symbol are
true, otherwise the expression is considered false.  The OR operator
returns true if either operand is true.  The NOT operator returns true
if the left operand is true and the right operand is false.
.PP
The NEAR operator, though not boolean, returns true if the operands on
either side of the operator are within a specified number of words from
each other.  For example, the words "boolean" and "either" are separated
by 6 words in the previous sentence.  If the distance specified on the
command-line is 10, the expression is true.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Normally, exit status is 0 if matches were found, and 1 if no matches
were found.  Exit status is 2 if there were syntax errors in the
expression or other system errors.
.SH AUTHOR
Marc Tardif <intmktg@cam.org>
