\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename ballandpaddle.info
@include version.texi
@settitle Ball and Paddle
@syncodeindex pg cp
@c %**end of header
@copying
This manual is for Ball and Paddle (version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}), 
which is a 2D game for GNU. 

Copyright @copyright{} 2007, 2008 Eric Hutchins

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover Texts being ``A GNU Manual,''
and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the
license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License.''

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have the freedom to
copy and modify this GNU manual.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Ball and Paddle
@direntry
* sample: (sample)Invoking sample.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Ball and Paddle
@subtitle for version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author Eric P. Hutchins (@email{hutchiep190@@potsdam.edu})
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Ball and Paddle

This manual is for Ball and Paddle (version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}).
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview::
* Basic Gameplay::
* Controls::
* Blocks::
* Powerups::
* Scripting::
* GNU Free Documentation License::
* Index::
@end menu


@node Overview
@chapter Overview

Ball and Paddle is a simple 2D game featuring balls, blocks, a paddle, and powerups. 
The field has walls on the top, left, and right, but not on the bottom. 
You control a paddle at the bottom of the screen in order to keep the balls from dropping off the bottom of the field and aim the balls to destroy all the blocks on the level. 

@node Basic Gameplay
@chapter Basic Gameplay
@cindex Bonus time
@cindex Balls
@cindex Levels

You start with a number of remaining balls. 

When the level starts, one ball will be on the screen. 
It will fall in a random direction and you will have to move the paddle to keep it from falling off the bottom of the screen. 
As you play, the ball will hit blocks. 
Some blocks can be destroyed by one hit while others take more. 
When all blocks that can be destroyed are gone, you will move to the next level. 

If all balls on the screen fall off the bottom then you will lose one of your remaining balls and the level will reset. 

During the level, a meter at the bottom of the screen will be slowly depleting. 
This is a bonus for finishing the level quickly. 
When you finish a level, you get the points for how much is left in the bonus meter. 

@node Controls
@chapter Controls
@cindex Controls

These controls work for keyboard and mouse. 

@table @dfn
@item Left
Move the paddle left. 
@item Right
Move the paddle right. 
@item Spacebar / Mouse-click
Special Action, like shoot lasers if you have laser or releasing balls if you have glue. 
@end table

@node Blocks
@chapter Blocks
@cindex Blocks
@cindex Blocks, invincible

Most blocks are normal blocks which can be destroyed by one hit. 
Some are special and take more hits or other actions. 

There are invincible blocks which cannot be destroyed. These are not required to be destroyed for the level to end since they cannot be destroyed. 

@node Powerups
@chapter Powerups
@cindex Powerups
@cindex Expand
@cindex Shrink
@cindex Divide
@cindex Laser
@cindex Glue
@cindex Powerballs
@cindex Fast
@cindex Slow

@table @dfn
@item Expand
This powerup makes your paddle grow. 
@item Shrink
This powerup makes your paddle shrink. 
@item Divide
This powerup makes each ball into 3 new balls. 
@item Laser
This powerup gives you a laser on the paddle. Press space or click to shoot. 
@item Glue
This powerup makes your paddle into glue, making balls stick to it. When they stick, press space or click to release the balls. 
@item Powerball
This powerup turns your balls into ``Powerballs,'' which mean that your balls can go right through normal blocks instead of bouncing off of them. 
@item Fast
This powerup makes the balls move faster. 
@item Slow
This powerup makes the balls move slower. 
@end table

@node Scripting
@chapter Scripting
@cindex scripting
@cindex guile
@cindex levels
There are many things that can be scripted since version 0.8.0. 
Here is a list of guile commands that can be used in the levels. 

Note that at the moment the only font face that works is the default "FreeSans". This is expected to change in later versions as the framework is in place but the code is not yet written. 
Actually, it will always default to "FreeSans" no matter what you write but if you want to prepare for a time when it may be required, you may add "(set-score-font-face "FreeSans"), (set-score-label-font-face "FreeSans")" etc.

@table @dfn
@item level-add-powerup-type name width height sx sy script
Adds a type of powerup to use in later script. (sx, sy) are the coordinates in the source image of the powerup. script is a "quoted" string with script that runs when the powerup is obtained. 
@item level-add-block-type name width height sx sy invincible script
Adds a type of block to use in later script. (sx, sy) are the coordinates in the source image of the block. If invincible is #t, then you may win the level without destroying this block. script is a "quoted" string with script that runs when the block is hit. 
@item level-add-powerup x y type
Adds a powerup with type name "type"
@item level-add-block x y type
Adds a block with type name "type"
@item set-skin filename
Set the filename of the skin to use. 
@item set-background filename
Set the filename of the background on the field. 
@item set-ball-size size
Set the size of both the ball graphic and the ball itself. 
@item set-powerup-width
Set the width of powerups. 
@item set-powerup-height
Set the height of powerups. 
@item set-bonus-time bonus-time
Set the bonus time for the level. 
@item set-field-x field-x
Set the field's x coordinate on screen. 
@item set-field-y field-y
Set the field's y coordinate on screen. 
@item set-field-width field-width
Set the field's width on screen. 
@item set-field-height field-height
Set the field's height on screen. 
@item get-block-type-width type
Returns the width of the block type named "type"
@item get-block-type-height type
Returns the height of the block type named "type"
@item effect-stretch-paddle
Stretch the paddle. Changes smallest to medium and medium to largest. 
@item effect-shrink-paddle
Shrink the paddle. Changes medium to smallest and largest to medium. 
@item effect-divide-balls
Makes each ball into three balls that go in their own paths. 
@item effect-laser-power
Gives the player laser power on the paddle. 
@item effect-glue-power
Gives the player a glue paddle that balls will stick to and then can be aimed and released. 
@item effect-power-balls
Makes each ball turn into a "powerball" which can destroy block faster and does not bounce off blocks. 
@item effect-reverse-controls
Makes left go right and right go left. The developer has found this not to be fun but feel free to try it. Maybe make it only appear on advanced levels?
@item effect-speedup-balls
Makes the balls move faster. 
@item effect-slowdown-balls
Makes the balls move slower. 
@item play-sound name
Plays the sound with name of "name"
@item level-add-sound name
Adds a sound with name "name" and filename "name.wav"
@item score-add amount
Adds to score by amount
@item set-bonus-timer-rect x y width height
Sets the x, y, width, and height of the bonus timer when it is full. 
@item set-bonus-timer-source x y width height
Sets the rectangle of the source image of the bonus timer
@item set-bonus-timer-start x y width height
Sets the rectangle of the source image of the part of the bonus timer that sticks out of the left edge of the timer
@item set-bonus-timer-end x y width height
Sets the rectangle of the source image of the part of the bonus timer that sticks out of the right edge of the timer
@item set-gameover-initial-time initial-time
Sets the time in the gameover screen before anything happens
@item set-gameover-ball-time ball-time
Sets the amount of time it pauses on each ball before moving to the next
@item set-gameover-ball-score ball-score
Sets how much each ball at the end of the game is worth
@item set-gameover-ball-padding ball-padding
Sets how much space it shows between balls in the gameover screen
@item set-gameover-balls-x balls-x
The x coordinate of the list of balls
@item set-gameover-balls-x balls-y
The y coordinate of the list of balls
@item set-gameover-score-font-color r g b
Set the font color of the score in the gameover screen
@item set-gameover-score-label-font-color r g b
Set the font color of the "Score:" label in the gameover screen
@item set-gameover-score-font-size size
Set the font size of the score in the gameover screen
@item set-gameover-score-label-font-size size
Set the font size of the "Score:" label in the gameover screen
@item set-gameover-score-font-face face
Set the font face of the score in the gameover screen
@item set-gameover-score-label-font-face face
Set the font face of the "Score:" label in the gameover screen
@item set-gameover-score-pos x y
Set the position of the score in the gameover screen
@item set-gameover-score-label-pos x y
Set the position of the "Score:" label in the gameover screen
@item set-score-font-color r g b
Set the font color of the score in game
@item set-score-label-font-color r g b
Set the font color of the "Score:" label in game
@item set-score-font-size size
Set the font size of the score in game
@item set-score-label-font-size size
Set the font size of the "Score:" label in game
@item set-score-font-face face
Set the font face of the score in game
@item set-score-label-font-face face
Set the font face of the "Score:" label in game
@item set-score-pos x y
Set the position of the score in game
@item set-score-label-pos x y
Set the position of the "Score:" label in game
@item set-level-font-color r g b
Set the font color of the level in game
@item set-level-label-font-color r g b
Set the font color of the "Level:" label in game
@item set-level-font-size size
Set the font size of the level in game
@item set-level-label-font-size size
Set the font size of the "Level:" label in game
@item set-level-font-face face
Set the font face of the level in game
@item set-level-label-font-face face
Set the font face of the "Level:" label in game
@item set-level-pos x y
Set the position of the level in game
@item set-level-label-pos x y
Set the position of the "Level:" label in game
@item set-ball-padding ball-padding
Set the amount of space between balls in the display of remaining balls
@item set-balls-x balls-x
Set the x coordinate of the extra balls display
@item set-balls-y balls-y
Set the y coordinate of the extra balls display
@end table

These commands reference a "current" block or ball. These are meant to be used in the script of a block type so that when a ball hits a block, these commands will execute. 

@table @dfn
@item random-powerup chance
Randomly makes a random powerup appear on the current block with probably of chance from 0 to 1
@item current-ball-remove
Removes the ball the hit the block
@item current-block-remove
Removes the block that was hit
@item current-ball-set-speed speed
Sets the speed of the ball who hit the block to "speed"
@item current-block-set-type type
Sets the type of the block that was hit to type
@item current-block-width
Returns the width of the current block
@item current-block-height
Returns the height of the current block
@item current-block-x
Returns the x coordinate of the current block
@item current-block-y
Returns the y coordinate of the current block
@end table

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

@include fdl.texi


@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
