File: logo/README

GNU C-Graph Version 2.0
October 2011
 
Copyright (c) 2011 Adrienne Gaye Thompson.

This file is part of GNU C-Graph.

The GNU C-Graph splash image "c-graph.gif" is licensed under the terms
of the GNU General Public License (the GPL) as published by the Free
Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your
option) any later version.

GNU C-Graph is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GPL for
more details.

GNU C-Graph includes the file COPYING, which contains a copy of the GPL
version 3.0. You may view the GPL online at
<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.

~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~


The splash screen is a work in progress inspired by robot vision, the
movie "Blade Runner" (1982) directed by Ridley Scott, and the
copyright symbol. The graph in the robotic eye connotes a play on the
words "See Graph", while the copyright symbol is a metaphoric
depiction of my struggle for recognition of sole authorship and
associated rights in the original BSc. dissertation from which C-Graph
is derived "Interactive Computer Package Demonstrating: Sampling,
Convolution and the FFT". I conceived the dissertations' thesis in
October 1982, the beginning of the Honours year of my BSc. engineering
programme at the University of Aberdeen, Scotland. See the file
"COPYING" for the copyright notice, and visit
<http://codeartnow.com/law-project> for further information.

Adrienne Gaye Thompson
October 2011

