'\" t
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2003 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" See section COPYING for conditions for redistribution
.TH dbconfig 5 "August 2003" "GNATS 4.2.0" "GNATS Admininstration Files"
.SH NAME
dbconfig \- GNATS database configuration file
.SH DESCRIPTION
The dbconfig configuration file controls the configuration of a GNATS
database.  Each database has its own individual copy of the file,
which is located in the \fBgnats-adm\fR administrative subdirectory of
the database.

For further information about the dbconfig file, please see the GNATS manual,
.I Keeping Track: Managing Messages With GNATS
(also installed as the GNU Info file
.BR gnats.info )
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.I Keeping Track: Managing Messages With GNATS
(also installed as the GNU Info file
.BR gnats.info )
.LP
.BR databases (5),
.BR dbconfig (5),
.BR delete-pr (8),
.BR edit-pr (1)
.BR file-pr (8),
.BR gen-index (8),
.BR gnats (7),
.BR gnatsd (8),
.BR mkcat (8),
.BR mkdb (8),
.BR pr-edit (8),
.BR query-pr (1),
.BR queue-pr (8),
.BR send-pr (1).
.SH COPYING
Copyright (c) 2000, 2003, Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
