.\" Copyright (c) 1993, 1999, 2003 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" See section COPYING for conditions for redistribution
.TH mkcat 8 "August 2003" "GNATS 4.2.0" "GNATS Admininstration Utilities"
.de BP
.sp
.ti -.2i
\(**
..
.SH NAME
mkcat \- create a new GNATS category
.SH SYNOPSIS
.hy 0
.na
.TP
.B mkcat
[
.BI -d \ databasename
|
.BI --database= databasename
]
.br
[
.BI -h
|
.BI --help
]
.ad b
.hy 1
.SH DESCRIPTION
Scans the database for any new categories, creating new subdirectories
in the database directory if any are found.
.P
This program is mostly obsolete since directories for categories are
automatically created as necessary, but is left for histerical
reasons.
.P
mkcat should be run by the GNATS user (by default \fBgnats\fR).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -d\fR,\fB --database
Specifies the database to be scanned for new categories; if no
database is specified, the database named \fIdefault\fR is assumed.
This option overrides the database specified in the \fBGNATSDB\fR
environment variable.
.TP
.B -h\fR,\fB --help
Displays a short usage message.
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
The \fBGNATSDB\fR environment variable is used to determine which database to
use.  For a local database, it contains the name of the database to access.
If \fBGNATSDB\fR is not set, the database named \fIdefault\fR is used.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.I Keeping Track: Managing Messages With GNATS
(also installed as the GNU Info file
.BR gnats.info )
.LP
.BR databases (5),
.BR dbconfig (5),
.BR delete-pr (8),
.BR edit-pr (1)
.BR file-pr (8),
.BR gen-index (8),
.BR gnats (7),
.BR gnatsd (8),
.BR mkcat (8),
.BR mkdb (8),
.BR pr-edit (8),
.BR query-pr (1),
.BR queue-pr (8),
.BR send-pr (1).
.SH COPYING
Copyright (c) 1993, 1999, 2003, Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
