.\" Copyright (c) 1999, 2003 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" See section COPYING for conditions for redistribution
.TH mkdb 8 "August 2003" "GNATS 4.2.0" "GNATS Admininstration Utilities"
.de BP
.sp
.ti -.2i
\(**
..
.SH NAME
mkdb \- create a new GNATS database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.hy 0
.na
.TP
.B mkdb \fIdatabasename\fR
.ad b
.hy 1
.SH DESCRIPTION
Looks up \fIdatabasename\fR in the GNATS \fBdatabases\fR file and
creates a database in the location specified there.  \fBmkdb\fR
creates the directory and populates it with a set of default files
copied from the /usr/local/etc/gnats/defaults directory.
.P
Note the implications of this: an entry in \fBdatabases\fR must be
created before \fBmkdb\fR is run.
.P
The command should be run as the GNATS user, by default \fBgnats\fR.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B databasename
Specifies the name of the database to be created.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.I Keeping Track: Managing Messages With GNATS
(also installed as the GNU Info file
.BR gnats.info )
.LP
.BR databases (5),
.BR dbconfig (5),
.BR delete-pr (8),
.BR edit-pr (1)
.BR file-pr (8),
.BR gen-index (8),
.BR gnats (7),
.BR gnatsd (8),
.BR mkcat (8),
.BR mkdb (8),
.BR pr-edit (8),
.BR query-pr (1),
.BR queue-pr (8),
.BR send-pr (1).
.SH COPYING
Copyright (c) 2000, 2003, Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
