.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"    man page for send-pr.conf
.\"    (by Yngve Svendsen, yngve.svendsen@sun.com)
.\"
.\"    This file is part of GNATS
.\"
.\"    GNATS is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it
.\"    under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published
by
.\"    the Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your
.\"    option) any later version.
.\"
.\"    GNATS is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
.\"    WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"    GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"    You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\"    License along with PROGRAM; see the file COPYING.  If not,
.\"    write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place -
.\"    Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.nh
.TH send-pr.conf 5 "May 2001" "4.2.0" "GNATS User Utilities"
.SH NAME
send-pr.conf \- send-pr configuration file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /usr/local/etc/gnats/send-pr.conf
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B send-pr.conf
file contains the configuration information for the GNATS
.BR send-pr(1)
tool. Each line in the file specifies a configuration
\fIparameter\fR, together with an associated \fIvalue\fR. Parameters
defined in the send-pr.conf file override the defaults specified in
the
.B send-pr(1)
program file.
.PP
The file uses ordinary Bourne shell syntax, where '=' denotes
assignment of a value to a parameter.
.PP
The supported parameters, together with allowed values, are:
.TP
.B SUBMITTER =\ "string"
Sets the default value of the GNATS field \fIsubmitter\fR which is
used in the standard template for new PRs.
.TP
.B DEFAULT_ORGANIZATION =\ "organization"
Sets the default value of the GNATS field \fIorganization\fR which is
used in the standard template for new PRs.
.TP
.B MAILPROG =\ "command-string"
By default,
.B send-pr(1)
will submit Problem Reports by connecting directly
to the GNATS database server. However, when the MAILPROG parameter
points to a mailer, send will use e-mail to submit the PR to the GNATS
database. If the mailer needs to have the address that the mail is
being sent to specified on the command line, it should be specified in
MAILPROG as well. If sendmail or a sendmail-compatible mailer is being
used, the setting MAILPROG = "/usr/lib/sendmail\ \-oi\ \-t" should
work for most installations.
.TP
.B MAILADDR =\ "address"
When e-mail is to be used for submission of new Problem Reports, the
MAILADDR should be set to point to the address where PRs should be
sent.
.TP
.B TEMPLATE =\ "file"
GNATS administrators may want to provide a template for Problem
Reports. Templates are created by invoking
.B send-pr(1)
with the
\fB-P\fR option. When the TEMPLATE parameter is set to point to a
file created this way, the template will be loaded into the editor
when users invoke
.B send-pr(1).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.I Keeping Track: Managing Messages With GNATS
(also installed as the GNU Info file
.BR gnats.info )
and
.I Reporting Problems Using send-pr
(also installed as the GNU Info file
.BR send-pr.info ).
.LP
.BR gnats (7),
.BR send-pr (1),
.BR edit-pr (1),
.BR file-pr (8),
.BR queue-pr (8),
.BR nquery-pr (1),
.BR mkcat (8),
.BR rmcat (8),
.BR gen-index (8),
.BR mkdb (8).
.SH AUTHOR
Yngve Svendsen
.SH COPYING
Copyright (c) 2001 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
