.TH C-GRAPH "1" "December 2018" "c-graph " "User Commands"
.SH NAME
c-graph \- visualization tool for the convolution theorem
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B c-graph [\fI-d\fP\||\fI-h\fP\||\fI-v\fP\^] [\fI-n\fP\^]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBGNU C-Graph\fP (for \fIConvolution Graph\fP\^) is a tool for visualizing
the convolution of two signals using Gnuplot under the X Window System.
It computes the linear convolution of two signals in the time domain,
then compares their circular convolution by demonstrating the
.I convolution theorem \-
convolution of two signals in the time domain corresponds to
multiplication in the frequency domain.  Gnuplot command and graphics
output files are saved in the \fBc-graphs\fP directory for later use.
.PP
Each signal is modeled by a register of discrete values simulating samples
of a signal, and the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) computed by means of
the fast Fourier transform (FFT).
FFTs are computed on data series containing a power of two elements.
\fBc-graph\fP accepts data series sizes of powers of two in the range
64 to 1024, inclusive.
.PP
\fBc-graph\fP is menu-driven: it prompts the user for a number of samples,
the signal type, frequency, and a scaling coefficient (if applicable).
.PP
Data sets may consist of 64, 128, 256, 512, or 1024 samples.  If any
other data set size is chosen, the size is adjusted to the nearest
allowed power of two.
.PP
Signals may be periodic or aperiodic, according to input waveform type.
.PP
These signal types are periodic: sine, cosine, triangle, square, and sawtooth.
Periodic signals can be selected as continuous waves or as a pulse.  If the
pulse form is chosen, the input signal consists of a half-wave of the
signal type.  For example, a sine wave chosen as a pulse will provide
a sine wave of half the full wave duration (i.e., from 0 to \(*p\| radians,
or 0 to 180\(de).
.PP
These signal types are aperiodic: exponential, ramp, and the step function.
.PP
The allowable frequency range is from 0.5 to \fIN\fP/4, where \fIN\fP is
the number of samples.  If a value is entered outside of this range, the
frequency is set to a default of 1\ Hz.
.PP
The scaling coefficient may be positive or negative.  The maximum
absolute value of the scaling coefficient for signal types sine, cosine,
exponential, and the step function is \fIN\fP, whereas for signal types
triangle, square, sawtooth and ramp the maximum scale is\ 1.
With the default scaling coefficient of\ 1, signal types sine, cosine,
exponential, and the step function are unit functions; signal types
square and sawtooth have a maximum amplitude of half the period,
whereas that of a triangle is one-quarter the period.
.PP
Whether student, engineer, or scientist, aspiring special-effects animator
or roboticist, GNU C-Graph will help you find the adventure in the mathematics
of convolution.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-d\fP, \fB\-\-dedicate\fP
Print the dedication and exit.
.TP
\fB\-h\fP, \fB\-\-help\fP
Print the list of options and exit.
.TP
\fB\-n\fP, \fB\-\-no\-splash\fP
Invoke GNU C\-Graph with no splash screen.
.TP
\fB\-v\fP, \fB\-\-version\fP
Print the version of GNU C\-Graph and exit.
.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"
.TP
\fBGDFONTPATH\fP
This is the directory path that \fBgnuplot\fP(1) searches for fonts to
produce its graphs.  \fBc-graph\fP commands gnuplot to use a font named
"serif".  If gnuplot does not find this font, it will use a default.
To select the gnuplot font, create a symbolic link from the desired font
file to a file named "serif.ttf".  Then set GDFONTPATH to the directory
where "serif.ttf" is located.  For example if the file
/home/galactic/fonts/serif.ttf links to the desired serif font, then in
the Bourne shell use a command such as the following:
.PP
.RS 12
export GDFONTPATH=/home/galactic/fonts:/usr/share/fonts
.RE
.SH FILES
Upon exit,
.B c-graph
saves its sample sets and graphics files in the \fBc-graphs\fP
directory within the current working directory.  Here is a typical
recursive listing of the output directory contents:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
\& $ \fBls -R c-graphs\fP
\& c-graphs:
\& coms  graphs
\& 
\& c-graphs/coms:
\& convolutions.cg  signals.cg  time.dat  trans.dat  transforms.cg
\& 
\& c-graphs/graphs:
\& convolutions.png  signals.png  transforms.png
.fi
.RE
.PP
The \fBc-graphs/coms\fP directory contains the input for Gnuplot that
was used to generate the output graphics.  Files ending in ".cg" are
Gnuplot command files.  Files ending in ".dat" are ASCII data input
files; they are tables of floating point values of input waveforms.
.PP
The \fBc-graphs/graphs\fP directory contains the graphics output of
Gnuplot, in Portable Network Graphics (PNG) format.  These files can
be used in presentations and other documents to visually demonstrate
the convolution theorem.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs to agt@codeartnow.com.
.SH AUTHOR
\fBGNU C-Graph\fP was written by Adrienne Gaye Thompson (agt@codeartnow.com).
This package evolved from the BSc.\~Electrical Engineering honours
dissertation of Adrienne Thompson, "Interactive Computer Program
Demonstrating: Sampling Convolution and the FFT", University of Aberdeen,
Scotland (1983).
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 1982, 1983, 1996, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2018
Adrienne Gaye Thompson.
.PP
GNU C-Graph is licensed under the GPL version 3 or later with
Additional Terms as permitted under the GPL; see the COPYING file
in this package for details.  For the latest version of the GPL,
see http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html.
.PP
This is free software; you are free to modify and distribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
The \fBc-graph\fP Texinfo manual, included in this package, contains
further information.  That manual provides a thorough description of
possible parameters and waveforms, with typical examples.  An appendix
provides an overview of the convolution theorem.
.PP
With the GNU Texinfo package installed on your system, you can view the
manual with the command
.IP
.B info c-graph
.PP
Further documentation can be found on the GNU C-Graph home page,
https://www.gnu.org/software/c-graph/.
The source package includes a PDF version of the Texinfo manual.
A copy of this manual can also be found at
https://www.gnu.org/software/c-graph/manual/c-graph.pdf.
