Introduction
============

This directory contains GNU Emacs (and XEmacs with a little help)
support for the Sather programming language; currently, version 1.0
and 1.1.

The following describes the files in this directory:

sather.el               The core Emacs Lisp code for sather-mode.

sather-lib.el           Supporting libraries for working with Sather
                        files.

sather-module.el        The Emacs Lisp code for sather-module-mode,
                        for editing Sather modules.

sather.info*            The Sather 1.0 specification in GNU Info
                        format (made using `makeinfo' on
                        `sather.texinfo).

sather.texinfo          The Sather 1.0 specification in GNU Texinfo
                        format.

sather-mode.info*       The documentation describing the features and
			use of the Sather Emacs Programming
			Environment.

sather-mode.texinfo	The same in GNU Texinfo format.

sather-tutorial.info*   An eclectic tutorial for features of the
                        Sather language, in GNU Info format.

sather-tutorial.texinfo The same in GNU Texinfo format.

dir                     The Info directory listing of the Sather Info
                        documentation.

sample.emacs            A sample startup file that may make it easier
                        to start using sather-mode.

sather-mode is fully documented in `sather-mode.texinfo'.

Getting Started
===============

There are two ways to get started using these files.

1.  The Easy Way.

Use the appropriate code from `sample.emacs' to tell Emacs where to
find the files in your Sather distribution.  You can either copy this
file to `~/.emacs', load it from your existing `~/.emacs', or copy
parts you want to use into your `~/.emacs' (or other startup file).

You can even load the whole `sample.emacs' from your `~/.emacs' with:

    (load "sample.emacs")

if you put `sample.emacs' in your Emacs load path.

See your Emacs documentation for a full explanation of startup files.

2.  The Better Way.

Copy `sather.*' and `sather-lib.*' to an existing directory in you
Emacs load path (eg, `/usr/local/lib/emacs/site-lisp'), and copy
`sather.info*' to an existing directory in your Emacs Info path (eg,
/usr/local/info, or even ~/info).  You'll need to edit the `dir' file
in your Info directory to add the Sather info files to the info tree.
This is easiest if you just copy the appropriate lines from the
provided `dir' file.  Look in `sample.emacs' for an example of adding
directories to the Info directory list.

Then, edit one of your startup files in order for sather-mode to be
autoloaded by Emacs.  How to do this is in the header comment of the
`sather.el' file, or you can just copy the appropriate lines from
`sample.emacs'.

Bug Reports
===========

To submit reports (for bugs, comments, or suggestions) on sather-mode,
use the provided function, `sather-mode-submit-bug-report', or use the
"Sather" menu by selecting "Sather->Send Bug Report->Send Sather Mode
Bug Report".  If you're not using sather-mode on a site connected to
the net, but have net e-mail access, please use the automated bug
reporter, and then just write the buffer to a file and mail that to
the `sather-mode-help-address', which currently is something like:

    lewikk@aud.alcatel.com

All grammatically correct, cordial, and, preferably, humorous comments
are welcome.
