GNU ccd2cue is a CCD sheet to CUE sheet converter.  It supports the full
extent of CUE sheet format expressiveness, including mixed-mode discs
and CD-Text meta-data.

This is the README file for GNU ccd2cue version 0.5.

This package is a component of the GNU Operating System and is developed
by the GNU Project.

   Copyright © 2010, 2013, 2014, 2015 Bruno Félix Rezende Ribeiro

     Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
     document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
     Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
     Foundation; with no Invariant Sections.  A copy of the license is
     included in the file ‘GNU-FREE-DOCUMENTATION-LICENSE’.


— Table of Contents —
Preface
1 Description
2 Distribution
3 Getting a copy
4 Contact
5 Bug reporting
6 Contributing
7 Donating
8 Hacking


Preface
*******

   This file briefly explains for what this package is intended, gives
relevant considerations regarding dependencies, configuration, build,
installation and use, describes which are the rules for its
distribution, how to get a copy of it, how to contact the community, how
to fill bug reports, how to contribute to the package, how to make
donations to support its development and how to get started hacking the
code.  Bear in mind that instructions in this file are package-specific;
for general and in-depth configuration, build and installation
instructions refer to the file ‘INSTALL’ present in the top-level
directory of the source distribution.  If you have checked out the
source tree from the VCS repository see *note Hacking::.

   For other information about this package you can check the following
files found in the top level directory of the distribution:

‘NEWS’
     User-visible changes since previous versions;
‘TODO’
     Features we want to see implemented someday;
‘AUTHORS’
     List of major contributors;
‘THANKS’
     List of minor contributors;
‘DONORS’
     People who supported the development by donations;
‘INSTALL’
     Generic build and installation instructions;
‘ABOUT-NLS’
     Internationalization and localization matters;
‘COPYING’
     The program license;
‘GNU-FREE-DOCUMENTATION-LICENSE’
     The documentation license;
‘ChangeLog’
     Detailed list of changes of the source code;

   Information about the GNU operating system, the GNU Project and the
Free Software Movement are included in the distribution — for your
pleasure — in the form of some articles by Richard Stallman (RMS). See
the top-level files:

   • THE-GNU-MANIFESTO
   • THE-GNU-PROJECT
   • LINUX-AND-THE-GNU-SYSTEM
   • WHY-SOFTWARE-SHOULD-NOT-HAVE-OWNERS
   • WHY-FREE-SOFTWARE-NEEDS-FREE-DOCUMENTATION

   For more information about this program you can visit its home page
at <https://www.gnu.org/software/ccd2cue/>.  If you want to receive
notifications about new releases of this program or important issues
related to it, subscribe to its mailing list, as described in *note
Contact::, or subscribe to the package atom feed
<https://savannah.gnu.org/news/atom.php?group=ccd2cue>.

1 Description
*************

     Manifesto: On the internet there is a gigantic quantity of optical
     disc image files in numerous formats.  Countless times we need to
     burn some of them.  Some time ago I needed it, but I came across a
     file format extremely irritating for a Free Software user like me:
     a CD layout descriptor file, with ‘.ccd’ suffix, generated by a
     proprietary software called CloneCD. I searched the internet for a
     way to burn that file on the GNU+Linux-Libre system, but I only
     found a lot of people asking for a solution on a lot of forums, and
     getting the unanimous answer: no way!  At first I could not believe
     at that point there was no option.  Then, with a little bit of
     patience and research, I wrote some code to convert that files to a
     format much more common and accessible, an ad-hoc standard in the
     GNU operating system: the CUE sheet format.  So I could burn a lot
     of what I wanted!  I wondered whether it would be useful for
     others… and here is the result!
              — _Bruno Félix Rezende Ribeiro (oitofelix)_

   GNU ccd2cue is a CCD sheet to CUE sheet converter.  It supports the
full extent of CUE sheet format expressiveness, including mixed-mode
discs and CD-Text meta-data.  It plays an important role for those who
need to use optical disc data which is only available in the proprietary
sheet format CCD, but don’t want to surrender their freedom.  It fills
an important gap in the free software world because before its
conception it was impossible to use complex forms of optical disc data
laid out by CCD sheets in a whole/holy free operating system.

   The GNU ccd2cue documentation is also intended to be a reference
documentation for both sheet format specifications.  That way we can
reverse engineer the secret CCD sheet proprietary format only once and
then make the information available for developers in order to benefit
all free software users that want their software to be interoperable.
The CUE sheet format is not a secret, but with this package we take the
opportunity to ensure that its specification is available under a free
documentation license for the sake of the whole free software community.

2 Distribution
**************

   This program is "free software"; this means that everyone is free to
use it and free to redistribute it under certain conditions.  This
program is not in the public domain; it is copyrighted and there are
restrictions on its distribution, but these restrictions are designed to
permit everything that a good cooperating citizen would want to do.
What is not allowed is to try to prevent others from further sharing any
version of this program that they might get from you.  The precise
conditions are found in the GNU General Public License (‘COPYING’ file).
The program manual is covered by the GNU Free Documentation License
(‘GNU-FREE-DOCUMENTATION-LICENSE’ file).  This license is similar in
spirit to the GNU General Public License, but is more suitable for
documentation.

3 Getting a copy
****************

   One way to get a copy of this program is from someone else who has
it.  You need not ask for our permission to do so, or tell any one else;
just copy it.  You may also receive this program when you buy a
computer.  Computer manufacturers are free to distribute copies on the
same terms that apply to everyone else.  These terms require them to
give you the full sources, including whatever changes they may have
made, and to permit you to redistribute the program received from them
under the usual terms of the GNU General Public License.  In other
words, the program must be free for you when you get it, not just free
for the manufacturer.

   If you have access to the Internet, you can get the latest
distribution version of this program at
<https://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/ccd2cue/>.  Please, use a mirror if possible;
you will be automatically redirected to the nearest mirror at
<http://ftpmirror.gnu.org/ccd2cue/>.

   A VCS repository, where the development takes place, is also
available.  It maintains the full history of modifications of every
single source file.  You can checkout any given revision of any file or
get a snapshot of the entire source tree in a particular desired state.
Special build tools, as described in *note Hacking::, are required to
build from those checkouts, though.  Notably, to stay up to date with
the latest developments in the source tree, you can anonymously checkout
the repository with the following command:
     git clone git://git.savannah.gnu.org/ccd2cue.git

4 Contact
*********

   You can get in touch with other users and the developers of this
program by subscribing to its mailing list.  Anyone is welcome to join
the list; to do so, visit ccd2cue’s help and support mailing list web
interface (https://lists.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/ccd2cue/).  To post a
message to all the list members, send email to <ccd2cue@gnu.org>.  To
see the collection of prior postings to the list, visit its archive
(https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/ccd2cue/).  You can use this list
for all discussion, including asking for help and bug reporting,
although the preferred method for reporting bugs is sending a mail to
<bug-ccd2cue@gnu.org>, the ccd2cue’s bug reporting mailing list.  See
*note Bug reporting::.

   If you feel somewhat chatty, eager for a somewhat more instantaneous
response from community, you can join us on our friendly IRC channel:
‘irc://irc.freenode.net/ccd2cue’.

5 Bug reporting
***************

   If you came across some problem and need help you can contact the
community as described in *note Contact::.  If you think you found a
bug, but is not quite sure about it, you can ask for support sending a
mail to <ccd2cue@gnu.org>.  We will revise your post, advise you and
take the appropriate measures.  If you are confident you have found a
bug, you can submit a bug report directly to <bug-ccd2cue@gnu.org>.  You
can subscribe to this ccd2cue’s bug reporting mailing list at its web
interface (https://lists.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/bug-ccd2cue/).  To see
the collection of prior reported bugs, visit its archive
(https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/bug-ccd2cue/).  Please, when
reporting a bug include enough information for the maintainers to
reproduce the problem.  Generally speaking, that means:

   • The contents of any input files necessary to reproduce the bug and
     command line invocations of the program(s) involved (crucial!).
   • A description of the problem and any samples of the erroneous
     output.
   • The version number of the program(s) involved (use ‘--version’).
   • Hardware, operating system, and compiler versions (‘uname -a’).
   • Unusual options you gave to configure, if any (see
     ‘config.status’).
   • Anything else that you think would be helpful.

6 Contributing
**************

   This program is a collaborative effort and we encourage contributions
from anyone and everyone — your help is very much appreciated.  You can
help in many ways:

   • Donate to developers in order to support their work.  See *note
     Donating::.
   • Write documentation.  We are specially in need to complete the CCD
     sheet format specification.
   • Help users in the mailing list and IRC channel.
   • Find and report bugs.  *Note Bug reporting::.
   • Fix reported bugs.
   • Implement new feature ideas.
   • Write test cases.
   • Check the documentation against the implementation.
   • Translate the program strings to other languages.

   You can join the development team to contribute code and
documentation at the development page
(https://savannah.gnu.org/projects/ccd2cue/).  Patches are most welcome,
but contributed code should follow the *note (standards)::.  If it
doesn’t, we’ll need to find someone to fix the code before we can use
it.  It is also necessary that the contributor be willing to assign
their copyright to the FSF, since the developers plan to make it
officially part of the GNU operating system and they want FSF to enforce
the program’s license.  To get started hacking see *note Hacking::.

7 Donating
**********

   If you find this program useful, please *send a donation* to its
developers to support their work.  If you use this program at your
workplace, please suggest that the company make a donation.  We
appreciate contributions of any size – donations enable us to spend more
time working on this package, and help cover our infrastructure
expenses.

   If you’d like to make a donation of any value, please send it to the
following Bitcoin address:

     12sKDaBNYekQuRPdrpnbUL4YRDKrzMnY62

   Since we aren’t a tax-exempt organization, we can’t offer you a tax
deduction, but for all donations over 0.05 BTC, we’d be happy to
recognize your contribution on the donors page (DONORS.html) and on
‘DONORS’ file for the next release.

   We are also happy to consider making particular improvements or
changes, or giving specific technical assistance, in return for a
substantial donation over 0.5 BTC. If you would like to discuss this
possibility, write to me at <oitofelix@gnu.org>.

   Another possibility is to pay a software maintenance fee.  Again,
write to me about this at <oitofelix@gnu.org> to discuss how much you
want to pay and how much maintenance we can offer in return.

                      *Thanks for your support!*

8 Hacking
*********

The development sources are available through VCS at Savannah:

     https://savannah.gnu.org/git/?group=ccd2cue

   If you are getting the sources from a VCS (or change ‘configure.ac’),
you’ll need to have Automake, Autoconf and Gettext installed to
(re)build.  You’ll also need help2man.  All of these programs are
available from <https://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/>.

   After getting the VCS sources, and installing the tools above, you
can run ‘./bootstrap && ./configure && make’ to do a fresh build.  After
that first time, running ‘make’ should suffice to rebuild the program
with your changes.  See file ‘INSTALL’.

   When modifying the sources, or making a distribution, more is needed,
as follows:

   • This distribution also uses Gnulib
     (https://www.gnu.org/software/gnulib) to share common files, stored
     as a submodule in git.
   • When updating gettext, besides the normal installation on the
     system, it is necessary to run ‘gettextize -f’ in this hierarchy to
     update the ‘po/’ infrastructure.  After doing so, rerun
     ‘gnulib-tool --import’ since otherwise older files will have been
     imported.  *Note (gnulib)::, for more information.

   When committing changes to the repository always create an entry in
the ‘doc/release/latest-news.texi’ file for any user-visible changes or
additions made.  This file is intended to provide the latest release
news for the ‘NEWS.texi’ and ‘ANNOUNCEMENT.texi’ files to avoid
duplication of information and syncing work.  After a release is made
the news items should be moved to the ‘NEWS.texi’ file and another news
list should be built from scratch in the ‘ANNOUNCEMENT.texi’ file.

