.TH SABROWSE 1
.SH NAME
sabrowse \- Sather 1.0 browser
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sabrowse
[
.BI files
and
.BI <compiler options> 
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sabrowse
is the Sather 1.0 browser.  It uses almost the same front end as the
Sather compiler, sacomp, and accepts all the same options.  However, all
options except for the sather source and module file names and "-main"
are ignored.  You should be able to start up the browser with the same
module files that you use for the compiler. Warning messages regarding
options that are not meaningful for the browser will be displayed.


.SH USAGE
The environment variable SATHER_HOME must be set to the installation
directory of the compiler at your site.
Then a file "foo.sa" with the FOO class containing main can be
browsed with the command
"sabrowse foo.sa -main FOO".
For example, a user might have to set the environment variable SATHER_HOME to
"/usr/lib/sather" and add "/usr/lib/sather/Bin" to their path.
Make sure that the path name does not have a trailing slash, since this
confuses some of the tcl scripts.

.SH FILES
File names must be in one of the following forms:

.IR file .sa
-  A Sather source file.
 
.IR file .module
-  A Sather commands file.

	Many of the browser configuration parameters can be changed
using menu items. The current configuration information may be saved
in a file .bsConfig.tcl in the user's home directory, which will be
sourced the next time the browser starts up.  

	A useful configuration item is whether the browser comes up
with a separate window for the graph display. This may be changed from
the configuration menu, but the browser must be re-started for the
change to take effect. All other configuration options should take
effect immediately. The browser menus and configuration options are
described in more detail under the Help menu of the Browser.

	By default, the browser uses "-has" clauses and should display
all classes that are reachable from the main routine of the sather
program on which the browser is being run.  In order to see
parametrized classes, there must be at least one instantiation of the
parameters present among the reachable classes.

.SH BROWSER HELP
	Help is available for various aspects of the browser from the
Help menu. The help files are stored in SATHER_HOME/Browser/Help.

.SH BROWSER SPECIFIC OPTIONS 
.LP
.TP
.BI \-non_interactive  " tcl_file"
Run the browser without throwing up a graphical window. The Tcl file
tcl_file is sourced for commands. Users should not need to use this
option, but it is extensively used by the scripts that generate html
and hence is documented here.

.SH BUGS

See the BUGS section file "Browser/README" in the Sather distribution.
Send browser bug reports to "bug-sather@gnu.org"

.SH SEE ALSO
  sacomp(1) and the Help menu in the browser.
