\chapter{Authors}
Version 1.02 of Dominion was the first with this name.  It was
previously called {\em Stony Brook World} (SBW), until too many people
suggested a catchier name.

Here is a list of the people who actually wrote code for sbw/dominion
that is in the current release.  The order is that in which they wrote
their first piece of code.

Mark Galassi (mark@galassi.org) Wrote the original game.  User
interface (in curses), basic data structures, world generator,
economy, technology, magic, basic army work, manual and formatting of
manual with LaTeXinfo, miscellaneous.  Currently maintains dominion.

Michael Fischer (greendog@insti.physics.sunysb.edu) Update program,
battle code, developed exec file format, dom_print, manual, lots of
other things.

Doug Novellano (doug@insti.physics.sunysb.edu) Mail and News systems.

Keith Messing (keith@max.physics.sunysb.edu???) Initial diplomacy system.

Alan Saporta (gandalf@insti.physics.sunysb.edu) Work on some exec
routines, many suggestions of directions for the game.

Joanne Rosenshein (raven@max.physics.sunysb.edu) Initial draft of the
manual, many suggestions of directions for the game.

Stephen Bae (sbae@max.physics.sunysb.edu???) Basic world memory
allocation.

Chris Coligado (noel@max.physics.sunysb.edu???) Army and battle code.

C. Titus Brown (brown@reed.edu) Adding nations and improvements on the
reports; revised army menu and transportation menu.  Lots of
miscellaneous things.

Charles Ofria (charles@krl.caltech.edu) Designed the ``cns'' file,
most magic orders and many races and techno powers; coded some spells.

There are also some major contributions from people not in Stony
Brook:

Stephen Underwood (hiranu@netcom.com) Fractal terrain generator and
contributions in very many areas.

Paolo Montrasio (montra@ghost.unimi.it) Several suggestions.

Kevin Hart (hart@cs.utk.edu) CN system.

Many others have made very important creative suggestions to the game,
though they were not involved in the actual coding.  Here are some
names that come to mind.  Please send us mail if we have forgotten
any.  Tony Matranga, Tim Poplaski, Chris Adami, and everyone else who
participated in the FALL SBW and SPRING DOMINION games at Stony Brook
in the fall 1990 and spring 1991 semesters.
