@subheading gss_encapsulate_token
@anchor{gss_encapsulate_token}
@deftypefun {extern OM_uint32} {gss_encapsulate_token} (gss_const_buffer_t @var{input_token}, gss_const_OID @var{token_oid}, gss_buffer_t @var{output_token})
@var{input_token}: (buffer, opaque, read) Buffer with GSS-API context token data.

@var{token_oid}: (Object ID, read) Object identifier of token.

@var{output_token}: (buffer, opaque, modify) Encapsulated token data;
caller must release with gss_release_buffer().


Add the mechanism-independent token header to GSS-API context token
data.  This is used for the initial token of a GSS-API context
establishment sequence.  It incorporates an identifier of the
mechanism type to be used on that context, and enables tokens to be
interpreted unambiguously at GSS-API peers.  See further section
3.1 of RFC 2743.  This function is standardized in RFC 6339.

Returns:


@code{GSS_S_COMPLETE}: Indicates successful completion, and that output
parameters holds correct information.


@code{GSS_S_FAILURE}: Indicates that encapsulation failed for reasons
unspecified at the GSS-API level.
@end deftypefun

@subheading gss_decapsulate_token
@anchor{gss_decapsulate_token}
@deftypefun {OM_uint32} {gss_decapsulate_token} (gss_const_buffer_t @var{input_token}, gss_const_OID @var{token_oid}, gss_buffer_t @var{output_token})
@var{input_token}: (buffer, opaque, read) Buffer with GSS-API context token.

@var{token_oid}: (Object ID, read) Expected object identifier of token.

@var{output_token}: (buffer, opaque, modify) Decapsulated token data;
caller must release with gss_release_buffer().


Remove the mechanism-independent token header from an initial
GSS-API context token.  Unwrap a buffer in the
mechanism-independent token format.  This is the reverse of
gss_encapsulate_token().  The translation is loss-less, all data is
preserved as is.  This function is standardized in RFC 6339.

Return value:


@code{GSS_S_COMPLETE}: Indicates successful completion, and that output
parameters holds correct information.


@code{GSS_S_DEFECTIVE_TOKEN}: Means that the token failed consistency
checks (e.g., OID mismatch or ASN.1 DER length errors).


@code{GSS_S_FAILURE}: Indicates that decapsulation failed for reasons
unspecified at the GSS-API level.
@end deftypefun

