@item SHISHI_ASN1_ERROR
Error in ASN.1 function (corrupt data?)

@item SHISHI_FOPEN_ERROR
Could not open file

@item SHISHI_IO_ERROR
File input/output error

@item SHISHI_MALLOC_ERROR
Memory allocation error in shishi library.

@item SHISHI_BASE64_ERROR
Base64 encoding or decoding failed. Data corrupt?

@item SHISHI_REALM_MISMATCH
Client realm value differ between request and reply.

@item SHISHI_CNAME_MISMATCH
Client name value differ between request and reply.

@item SHISHI_NONCE_MISMATCH
Replay protection value (nonce) differ between request and reply.

@item SHISHI_TGSREP_BAD_KEYTYPE
Incorrect key type used in TGS reply.

@item SHISHI_KDCREP_BAD_KEYTYPE
Incorrect key type used in reply from KDC.

@item SHISHI_APREP_BAD_KEYTYPE
Incorrect key type used in AP reply.

@item SHISHI_APREP_VERIFY_FAILED
Failed verification of AP reply.

@item SHISHI_APREQ_BAD_KEYTYPE
Incorrect key type used in AP request.

@item SHISHI_TOO_SMALL_BUFFER
Provided buffer was too small.

@item SHISHI_DERIVEDKEY_TOO_SMALL
Derived key material is too short to be applicable.

@item SHISHI_KEY_TOO_LARGE
The key is too large to be usable.

@item SHISHI_CRYPTO_ERROR
Low-level cryptographic primitive failed.  This usually indicates bad password or data corruption.

@item SHISHI_CRYPTO_INTERNAL_ERROR
Internal error in low-level crypto routines.

@item SHISHI_SOCKET_ERROR
The system call socket() failed.  This usually indicates that your system does not support the socket type.

@item SHISHI_BIND_ERROR
The system call bind() failed.  This usually indicates insufficient permissions.

@item SHISHI_SENDTO_ERROR
The system call sendto() failed.

@item SHISHI_RECVFROM_ERROR
Error receiving data from server

@item SHISHI_CLOSE_ERROR
The system call close() failed.

@item SHISHI_KDC_TIMEOUT
Timed out talking to KDC. This usually indicates a network or KDC address problem.

@item SHISHI_KDC_NOT_KNOWN_FOR_REALM
No KDC known for given realm.

@item SHISHI_TTY_ERROR
No TTY assigned to process.

@item SHISHI_GOT_KRBERROR
Server replied to the request with an error message.

@item SHISHI_HANDLE_ERROR
Failure to use handle.  Missing handle, or misconfigured.

@item SHISHI_INVALID_TKTS
Ticket set not initialized.  This usually indicates an internal application error.

@item SHISHI_TICKET_BAD_KEYTYPE
Key type used to encrypt ticket doesn't match provided key. This usually indicates an internal application error.

@item SHISHI_INVALID_KEY
Reference to invalid encryption key.

@item SHISHI_APREQ_DECRYPT_FAILED
Could not decrypt AP-REQ using provided key. This usually indicates an internal application error.

@item SHISHI_TICKET_DECRYPT_FAILED
Could not decrypt Ticket using provided key. This usually indicates an internal application error.

@item SHISHI_INVALID_TICKET
Invalid ticked passed in call.

@item SHISHI_OUT_OF_RANGE
Argument lies outside of valid range.

@item SHISHI_ASN1_NO_ELEMENT
The ASN.1 structure does not contain the indicated element.

@item SHISHI_SAFE_BAD_KEYTYPE
Attempted access to non-existent key type.

@item SHISHI_SAFE_VERIFY_FAILED
Verification failed on either side.

@item SHISHI_PKCS5_INVALID_PRF
Invalid PKCS5 descriptor.

@item SHISHI_PKCS5_INVALID_ITERATION_COUNT
Invalid claim of iteration count in PKCS5 descriptor.

@item SHISHI_PKCS5_INVALID_DERIVED_KEY_LENGTH
Derived key length is incorrect for PKCS5 descriptor.

@item SHISHI_PKCS5_DERIVED_KEY_TOO_LONG
Derived key is too long for PKCS5 descriptor.

@item SHISHI_INVALID_PRINCIPAL_NAME
Principal name syntax error.

@item SHISHI_INVALID_ARGUMENT
Invalid argument passed in call.  Wrong or unknown value.

@item SHISHI_ASN1_NO_VALUE
The indicated ASN.1 element does not carry a value.

@item SHISHI_CONNECT_ERROR
Connection attempt failed.  Try again, or check availability.

@item SHISHI_VERIFY_FAILED
Verification failed on either side.

@item SHISHI_PRIV_BAD_KEYTYPE
The private key uses an incompatible encryption type.

@item SHISHI_FILE_ERROR
The desired file could not be accessed.  Check permissions.

@item SHISHI_ENCAPREPPART_BAD_KEYTYPE
The present AP reply specifies an inpermissible key type.

@item SHISHI_GETTIMEOFDAY_ERROR
A request for present time of day has failed. This is usually internal, but a valid time is imperative for us.

@item SHISHI_KEYTAB_ERROR
Failed to parse keytab file

@item SHISHI_CCACHE_ERROR
Failed to parse credential cache file

