\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename dionysus
@settitle Dionysus Documentation 0.0.1
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual is for GNU Dionysus (version 1.0.0, 22 Sept. 2009),
which prints a friendly greeting (and serves as an example GNU package).

Copyright @copyright{} 2009 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title Dionysus, a package for scientific constants and engineering parameters
@c The following two commands start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage
@c Output the table of contents at the beginning.
@contents

@c @ifnottex
@c @node Top
@c @top Dionysus
@c Dionysus, a package for scientific constants and engineering parameters
@c @end ifnottex
@c @menu
@c * First Chapter::    The first chapter is the
@c                        only chapter in this sample.
@c * Index::            Complete index.
@c @end menu

@chapter What is dionysus?
@cindex chapter, first
What is Dionysus?
@c @cindex index entry, another

@enumerate

Dionysus is a local machine search engine for universal constants and parameters of scientific and engineering relevance. If you develop a code and need any kind of well known constant you do not need to hard code them anymore. Just use Dionysus and it will do the job for you.

Dionysus is also useful if you need to know some well known constant but you do not have an Internet connection or you do not want to access to hundreds web pages to a simple value.

Dionysus has been developed as most carefully as possible and the author expects the package to be reliable for the plenty of values already included there.

Anytime you need a value, do not hard code it. Just ask Dionysus and it will give you the right answer. It is high consuming to look for parameters values, especially because those values are usually scattered among papers and websites, some of them being very old and/or impossible to find anymore.

Dionysus comes with a very good database of scientific and engineering values that you can use easily. You can even check the references for those values. Furthermore, it is very easy to add new values to this DataBase if you want.

@end enumerate

@chapter INSTALL
@cindex chapter, sconde
INSTALL

@enumerate
Very simple:
> cd src
> sudo make
@end enumerate

@chapter How it works
@cindex chapter, third
How it works

@enumerate
It is very simple to use it. Once Dionysus is installed, it works simply like that:
> dionysus_query databases/universal.ddb "constant name" "what you ask about that constant"
where "constant name" is the name of the constant you are querying about, and
"what you ask about that constant" is exactly what it means. For example, let us say you 
are looking for the value of the elementary charge, just type:
> dionysus_query databases/universal.ddb elementary_charge value

If you want to know a description of the elementary charge then type:
> dionysus_query databases/universal.ddb elementary_charge description

If you want to know a link that describe that value in more words type:
> dionysus_query databases/universal.ddb elementary_charge link

If you wanr to know the reference where the value has been taken just type:
> dionysus_query databses/universal.ddb elementary_charge reference

@end enumerate

@chapter Adding new values to Dionysus
@cindex chapter, fourth

@enumerate

How to add a new value to a dionysus DB? It's very easy. First of all you can choose if you want to add a value to an existing DB or if you want to create a new DB. I strongly recommend to use the "ddb" extension for a dionysus DB for coherence. In any case a dionysus DB is simply a ASCII file, nothing more nothing less. To add a new value you must follow the dionysus syntax for that purpose. No worries, the syntax is extremely easy and flexible.

First of all, every line that starts with a "#" symbol is a comment and will be completely ignored by the parser.

To define a new constant you must follow this syntax:
- Any definition starts by the word "def"
- Any property related to the constant is done as follow:
  property="blah blah"
- Any definition ends by the word "end"

For example, let us say we want to define the constant with the name "sellier_constant", the value "512", the units "Kb" and the link "www.gnu.org/software/archimedes". This is done by the following lines:
def
 name="sellier_constant"
 value="512"
 units="Kb"
 link="www.gnu.org/software/archimedes"
end

@end enumerate

@chapter EXAMPLES
@cindex chapter, fifth
EXAMPLES

@chapter TESTS (for C codes)
@cindex chapter, sixth
TESTS (for C codes)

@chapter Contacts
@cindex chapter, seventh
CONTACTS

For any information please contact me, the author of Dionysus, at the following address:

jeanmichel.sellier AT gmail DOT com

@bye
