\input texinfo @c vim: set textwidth=72:
@setfilename INSTALL.info
@include topdocs/defs.texi
@settitle INSTALL
@node Top, , , (dir)

@contents

@chapter INSTALL - how to compile and install GNU Solfege @value{SOLFEGEVERSION} on a GNU like system

This file contains info on how to build and install GNU Solfege.
For run-time info, check the README file and the man page.

The homepage for GNU Solfege, @uref{http://www.solfege.org},
might also be of interest.

@section Download

@subsection Source code
The latest version is available from
@uref{http://sourceforge.net/project/showfiles.php?group_id=1465}.

The source code is also available from the GNU ftp sites and their mirrors:
@uref{ftp://alpha.gnu.org/gnu/solfege} and 
@uref{ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/solfege}.

@subsection Precompiled binaries

Precompiled binaries are made available for some releases. I build
the windows installer, a liunx distribution neutral autopackage
for i386 computers and the debian package myself. But I am
depending on users to provide binaries for other operating systems. The
debian package is available directly from @uref{http://www.debian.org}.
The rest are available from Sourceforge:
@uref{http://sourceforge.net/project/showfiles.php?group_id=1465}.

@section Requirements

The requirements are listed in the @file{README} file.

@section Configuring and compiling

@example
./configure
make
su -c "make install"
@end example

should work, and will install into

@example
  /usr/local/bin
  /usr/local/share
  /usr/local/lib
  /usr/local/etc/solfege
@end example

On FreeBSD you can use gmake:

@example
./configure
gmake
su -c "gmake install"
@end example

Use the @option{--prefix} and @option{--sysconfdir} command line options
to install elsewhere. For example to install in your home directory:

@example
./configure --prefix=$HOME/usr --sysconfdir=$HOME/etc
make 
make install
@end example

If you just want to run Solfege without installing, do this:
@example
./configure
make
./solfege.py
@end example

The @command{configure} script can be given a number of options to
enable and disable various features. Some of them are described below.
For a complete list, type:

@example
./configure --help
@end example

@subsection @option{--disable-pygtk-test}
Do not test for PyGTK, assume it is installed. Use this option if you know
the package is installed, but the configure script still cannot detect
it.

@subsection @option{--disable-oss-sound}
Use this if you are compiling on an OS that don't have the OSS.
The default is @option{--enable-oss-sound}.

@section Packaging

@subsection Debian
Rename @file{debian-dir} to @file{debian} and run:

@example
dpkg-buildpackage -rfakeroot -us -uc
@end example

@subsection Rpm-based distributions
I did collection some spec files for rpm-based distros, contributed by
users. But these have not been updated for a very long time, so I do not
think they will work any more. Also, I do not
test these spec files myself, so you should send me an update if some of
the Requires or BuildRequires fields are wrong. Please notice that there may be a
difference between version 9 and 9.1 of a distro. Give me the exact
version number!

Here is an example how to build a binary rpm package for Red Hat 9.
Replace the filenames to fit your distro if required.

@example
cp solfege-@value{SOLFEGEVERSION}.tar.gz /usr/src/redhat/SOURCES/
tar zxf solfege-@value{SOLFEGEVERSION}.tar.gz
rpm -bb solfege-@value{SOLFEGEVERSION}/solfege.redhat9.spec
rpm -i /usr/src/redhat/RPMS/i386/solfege-@value{SOLFEGEVERSION}
@end example

Hopefully, binary rpm packages for some distributions will be provided
later.
@bye
