
'''
''' Part of the ht://Dig package   <http://www.htdig.org/>
''' Copyright (c) 1999, 2000, 2001 The ht://Dig Group
''' For copyright details, see the file COPYING in your distribution
''' or the GNU General Public License version 2 or later
''' <http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>
''' 
''' 
.TH htdb_dump 1 local
.SH NAME
htdb_dump \-

dump the content of an inverted index in Berkeley DB fashion


.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.ft CW

htdb_dump [-klNpWz] [-S pagesize] [-C cachesize] [-d ahr] [-f file] [-h home] [-s subdb] db_file
.ft R
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION

htdb_dump is a slightly modified version of the standard 
Berkeley DB db_dump utility.

The htdb_dump utility reads the database file
.B db_file
and
writes it to the standard output using a portable flat-text format
understood by the
.I htdb_load
utility. The argument
.B db_file
must be a file produced using
the Berkeley DB library functions.


.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B 
.B -W
Initialize WordContext(3) before dumping. With the
.B -z
flag allows to dump inverted indexes using the mifluz(3) specific
compression scheme. The MIFLUZ_CONFIG environment variable must be
set to a file containing the mifluz(3) configuration.
.TP
.B 
.B -z
The
.B db_file
is compressed. If
.B -W
is given the
mifluz(3) specific compression scheme is used. Otherwise the default
gzip compression scheme is used.
.TP
.B 
.B -d
Dump the specified database in a format helpful for debugging
the Berkeley DB library routines.
.TP
.B 
a
Display all information.
.TP
.B 
h
Display only page headers.
.TP
.B 
r
Do not display the free-list or pages on the free list.  This
mode is used by the recovery tests.
.PP
The output format of the
.B -d
option is not standard and may change,
without notice, between releases of the Berkeley DB library.
.TP
.B 
.B -f
Write to the specified
.B file
instead of to the standard output.
.TP
.B 
.B -h
Specify a home directory for the database.
As Berkeley DB versions before 2.0 did not support the concept of a
.I database home.
.TP
.B 
.B -k
Dump record numbers from Queue and Recno databases as keys.
.TP
.B 
.B -l
List the subdatabases stored in the database.
.TP
.B 
.B -N
Do not acquire shared region locks while running.  Other problems such
as potentially fatal errors in Berkeley DB will be ignored as well.  This option
is intended only for debugging errors and should not be used under any
other circumstances.
.TP
.B 
.B -p
If characters in either the key or data items are printing characters
(as defined by
.B isprint
(3)), use printing characters in
.B file
to represent them.  This option permits users to use standard
text editors and tools to modify the contents of databases.

Note, different systems may have different notions as to what characters
are considered
.I printing characters
, and databases dumped in
this manner may be less portable to external systems.
.TP
.B 
.B -s
Specify a subdatabase to dump.  If no subdatabase is specified, all
subdatabases found in the database are dumped.
.TP
.B 
.B -V
Write the version number to the standard output and exit.
.PP

Dumping and reloading Hash databases that use user-defined hash functions
will result in new databases that use the default hash function.
While using the default hash function may not be optimal for the new database,
it will continue to work correctly.

Dumping and reloading Btree databases that use user-defined prefix or
comparison functions will result in new databases that use the default
prefix and comparison functions.
.B In this case, it is quite likely that the database will be damaged
beyond repair permitting neither record storage or retrieval.
The only available workaround for either case is to modify the sources
for the
.I htdb_load
utility to load the
database using the correct hash, prefix and comparison functions.


.SH ENVIRONMENT

.B DB_HOME
If the
.B -h
option is not specified and the environment variable
DB_HOME is set, it is used as the path of the database home.


.B MIFLUZ_CONFIG
file name of configuration file read by WordContext(3). Defaults to
.B ~/.mifluz.


.SH AUTHORS

Sleepycat Software http://www.sleepycat.com/

Loic Dachary loic@gnu.org

The Ht://Dig group http://dev.htdig.org/


.SH SEE ALSO
htdb_stat(1), htdb_load(1), mifluzdump(1), mifluzload(1), mifluzsearch(1), mifluzdict(1), WordContext(3), WordList(3), WordDict(3), WordListOne(3), WordKey(3), WordKeyInfo(3), WordType(3), WordDBInfo(3), WordRecordInfo(3), WordRecord(3), WordReference(3), WordCursor(3), WordCursorOne(3), WordMonitor(3), Configuration(3), mifluz(3)

