
'''
''' Part of the ht://Dig package   <http://www.htdig.org/>
''' Copyright (c) 1999, 2000, 2001 The ht://Dig Group
''' For copyright details, see the file COPYING in your distribution
''' or the GNU General Public License version 2 or later
''' <http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>
''' 
''' 
.TH htdb_load 1 local
.SH NAME
htdb_load \-

displays statistics for Berkeley DB environments.


.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.ft CW

htdb_load [-nTzW] [-c name=value] [-f file] [-h home] [-C cachesize] [-t btree | hash | recno] db_file
.ft R
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION

The htdb_load utility reads from the standard input and loads it into
the database
.B db_file
.
The database
.B db_file
is created if it does not already exist.

The input to htdb_load must be in the output format specified by the
htdb_dump utility, or as specified for the
.B -T
below.


.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B 
.B -W
Initialize WordContext(3) before loading. With the
.B -z
flag allows to load inverted indexes using the mifluz(3) specific
compression scheme. The MIFLUZ_CONFIG environment variable must be
set to a file containing the mifluz(3) configuration.
.TP
.B 
.B -z
The
.B db_file
is compressed. If
.B -W
is given the
mifluz(3) specific compression scheme is used. Otherwise the default
gzip compression scheme is used.
.TP
.B 
.B -c
Specify configuration options for the DB structure 
ignoring any value they may have based on the input.
The command-line format is
.B name=value
.
See
.I Supported Keywords
for
a list of supported words for the
.B -c
option.
.TP
.B 
.B -f
Read from the specified
.B input
file instead of from
the standard input.
.TP
.B 
.B -h
Specify a home directory for the database.
If a home directory is specified, the database environment is opened using
the
.I DB_INIT_LOCK
,
.I DB_INIT_LOG
,
.I DB_INIT_MPOOL
,
.I DB_INIT_TXN
and
.I DB_USE_ENVIRON
flags to
DBENV->open. This means that htdb_load can be used to load
data into databases while they are in use by other processes. If the
DBENV->open call fails, or if no home directory is specified, the
database is still updated, but the environment is ignored, e.g., no
locking is done.
.TP
.B 
.B -n
Do not overwrite existing keys in the database when loading into an
already existing database.
If a key/data pair cannot be loaded into the database for this reason,
a warning message is displayed on the standard error output and the
key/data pair are skipped.
.TP
.B 
.B -T
The
.B -T
option allows non-Berkeley DB applications to easily load text files 
into databases.

If the database to be created is of type Btree or Hash, or the keyword
.B keys
is specified as set, the input must be paired lines of text,
where the first line of the pair is the key item, and the second line of
the pair is its corresponding data item.  If the database to be created
is of type Queue or Recno and the keywork
.B keys
is not set, the
input must be lines of text, where each line is a new data item for the
database.

A simple escape mechanism, where newline and backslash (\)
characters are special, is applied to the text input.
Newline characters are interpreted as record separators.
Backslash characters in the text will be interpreted in one of two ways:
if the backslash character precedes another backslash character, the pair
will be interpreted as a literal backslash.
If the backslash character precedes any other character, the two characters
following the backslash will be interpreted as hexadecimal specification of
a single character, e.g., \0a is a newline character in the ASCII
character set.

For this reason, any backslash or newline characters that naturally
occur in the text input must be escaped to avoid misinterpretation by
htdb_load

If the
.B -T
option is specified, the underlying access method type
must be specified using the
.B -t
option.
.TP
.B 
.B -t
Specify the underlying access method.
If no
.B -t
option is specified, the database will be loaded into a
database of the same type as was dumped, e.g., a Hash database will be
created if a Hash database was dumped.

Btree and Hash databases may be converted from one to the other.  Queue
and Recno databases may be converted from one to the other.  If the
.B -k
option was specified on the call to htdb_dump then Queue
and Recno databases may be converted to Btree or Hash, with the key being
the integer record number.
.TP
.B 
.B -V
Write the version number to the standard output and exit.
.PP

The htdb_load utility attaches to one or more of the Berkeley DB
shared memory regions.  In order to avoid region corruption, it 
should always be given
the chance to detach and exit gracefully.  To cause htdb_load to clean up
after itself and exit, send it an interrupt signal (SIGINT).

The htdb_load utility exits 0 on success, 1 if one or more key/data
pairs were not loaded into the database because the key already existed,
and >1 if an error occurs.


.SH KEYWORDS

The following keywords are supported for the
.B -c
command-line option
to the htdb_load utility. See DB->open for further discussion of
these keywords and what values should be specified.

The parenthetical listing specifies how the value part of the
.B name=value
pair is interpreted.
Items listed as (boolean) expect value to be
.B 1
(set) or
.B 0
(unset).
Items listed as (number) convert value to a number.
Items listed as (string) use the string value without modification.
.TP
.B bt_minkey (number)
The minimum number of keys per page.
.TP
.B db_lorder (number)
The byte order for integers in the stored database metadata.
.TP
.B db_pagesize (number)
The size of pages used for nodes in the tree, in bytes.
.TP
.B duplicates (boolean)
The value of the DB_DUP flag.
.TP
.B h_ffactor (number)
The density within the Hash database.
.TP
.B h_nelem (number)
The size of the Hash database.
.TP
.B keys (boolean)
Specify if keys are present for Queue or Recno databases.
.TP
.B re_len (number)
Specify fixed-length records of the specified length.
.TP
.B re_pad (string)
Specify the fixed-length record pad character.
.TP
.B recnum (boolean)
The value of the DB_RECNUM flag.
.TP
.B renumber (boolean)
The value of the DB_RENUMBER flag.
.TP
.B subdatabase (string)
The subdatabase to load.
.PP


.SH ENVIRONMENT

.B DB_HOME
If the
.B -h
option is not specified and the environment variable
DB_HOME is set, it is used as the path of the database home.


.B MIFLUZ_CONFIG
file name of configuration file read by WordContext(3). Defaults to
.B ~/.mifluz.


.SH AUTHORS

Sleepycat Software http://www.sleepycat.com/

Loic Dachary loic@gnu.org

The Ht://Dig group http://dev.htdig.org/


.SH SEE ALSO
htdb_dump(1), htdb_stat(1), mifluzdump(1), mifluzload(1), mifluzsearch(1), mifluzdict(1), WordContext(3), WordList(3), WordDict(3), WordListOne(3), WordKey(3), WordKeyInfo(3), WordType(3), WordDBInfo(3), WordRecordInfo(3), WordRecord(3), WordReference(3), WordCursor(3), WordCursorOne(3), WordMonitor(3), Configuration(3), mifluz(3)

