
'''
''' Part of the ht://Dig package   <http://www.htdig.org/>
''' Copyright (c) 2001 The ht://Dig Group
''' For copyright details, see the file COPYING in your distribution
''' or the GNU General Public License version 2 or later
''' <http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>
''' 
''' 
.TH mifluz-config 1 local
.SH NAME
mifluz-config \- print configuration information for the mifluz library.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.ft CW
mifluz-config [--help] [OPTION]
.ft R
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION

mifluz-config knows the details of the mifluz installation such as
the directory in which header files or libraries can be found. It
will display the requested information on the standard output. Only
one information can be requested.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B --bindir
The directory for installing executables that users run.

.TP
.B --datadir
The directory for installing read-only 
architecture-independent data.

.TP
.B --exec-prefix
The installation prefix for architecture-dependent files.

.TP
.B --includedir
The directory for installing C header files.

.TP
.B --infodir
The directory for installing documentation in 
Info format.

.TP
.B --libdir
The directory for installing object code libraries.

.TP
.B --libexecdir
The directory for installing executables that 
other programs run.

.TP
.B --localstatedir
The directory for installing modifiable 
single-machine data.

.TP
.B --mandir
The top-level directory for installing documentation 
in man format.

.TP
.B --prefix
The common installation prefix for all files.

.TP
.B --sbindir
The directory for installing executables that system
administrators run.

.TP
.B --sharedstatedir
The directory for installing modifiable 
architecture-independent data.

.TP
.B --sysconfdir
The directory for installing read-only 
single-machine data.

.TP
.B --libs	
Print library linking information.

.TP
.B --cflags	
Print pre-processor and compiler flags.

.TP
.B --help	
Display this help and exit.

.TP
.B --version	
Output version information.

.SH AUTHORS
Loic Dachary loic@gnu.org

The Ht://Dig group http://dev.htdig.org/

.SH SEE ALSO
mifluz(3)

