
'''
''' Part of the ht://Dig package   <http://www.htdig.org/>
''' Copyright (c) 1999, 2000, 2001 The ht://Dig Group
''' For copyright details, see the file COPYING in your distribution
''' or the GNU General Public License version 2 or later
''' <http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>
''' 
''' 
.TH WordDBInfo 3 local
.SH NAME
WordDBInfo \-
inverted index usage environment.


.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.ft CW

Only called thru WordContext::Initialize()
.ft R
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION

The inverted indexes may be shared among processes/threads and provide the
appropriate locking to prevent mistakes. In addition the memory cache
used by
.I WordList
objects may be shared by processes/threads, 
greatly reducing the memory needs in multi-process applications.
For more information about the shared environment, check the Berkeley
DB documentation.


.SH CONFIGURATION
For more information on the configuration attributes and a complete list of attributes, see the mifluz(3) manual page.
.TP
.B  wordlist_env_skip {true,false} (default false)
If true no environment is created at all. This must never 
be used if a
.I WordList
object is created. It may be
useful if only
.I WordKey
objects are used, for instance.
.TP
.B  wordlist_env_share {true,false} (default false)
If true a sharable environment is open or created if none exist.
.TP
.B  wordlist_env_dir <directory> (default .)
Only valid if
.I wordlist_env_share
set to
.I true.
Specify the directory in which the sharable environment will 
be created. All
inverted indexes specified with a non-absolute pathname will be
created relative to this directory.
.PP

.SH AUTHORS
Loic Dachary loic@gnu.org

The Ht://Dig group http://dev.htdig.org/


.SH SEE ALSO
htdb_dump(1), htdb_stat(1), htdb_load(1), mifluzdump(1), mifluzload(1), mifluzsearch(1), mifluzdict(1), WordContext(3), WordList(3), WordDict(3), WordListOne(3), WordKey(3), WordKeyInfo(3), WordType(3), WordRecordInfo(3), WordRecord(3), WordReference(3), WordCursor(3), WordCursorOne(3), WordMonitor(3), Configuration(3), mifluz(3)

