
'''
''' Part of the ht://Dig package   <http://www.htdig.org/>
''' Copyright (c) 1999, 2000, 2001 The ht://Dig Group
''' For copyright details, see the file COPYING in your distribution
''' or the GNU General Public License version 2 or later
''' <http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>
''' 
''' 
.TH WordCursorOne 3 local
.SH NAME
WordCursorOne \-

search and retrieve entries in a WordListOne object.


.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.ft CW

#include <WordList.h>

int callback(WordList *, WordDBCursor& , const WordReference *, Object &)
{
   ...
}

Object* data = ...

WordList *words = ...;

WordCursor *search = words->Cursor(callback, data);
WordCursor *search = words->Cursor(WordKey("word <UNDEF> <UNDEF>"));
WordCursor *search = words->Cursor(WordKey("word <UNDEF> <UNDEF>"), callback, data);
WordCursor *search = words->Cursor(WordKey());

...

if(search->Walk() == NOTOK) bark;
List* results = search->GetResults();

search->WalkInit();
if(search->WalkNext() == OK)
  dosomething(search->GetFound());
search->WalkFinish();
.ft R
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION

WordCursorOne is a WordCursor derived class that implements search
in a WordListOne object. It currently is the only derived class of
the WordCursor object. Most of its behaviour is described in the
WordCursor manual page, only the behaviour specific to WordCursorOne
is documented here.



.SH METHODS
.TP
.B   WordCursorOne(WordList *words)
Private constructor. Creator of the object must then call Initialize()
prior to using any other methods.
.TP
.B   WordCursorOne(WordList *words, wordlist_walk_callback_t callback, Object * callback_data)
Private constructor. See WordList::Cursor method with same prototype for
description.
.TP
.B   WordCursorOne(WordList *words, const WordKey &searchKey, int action = HTDIG_WORDLIST_WALKER)
Private constructor. See WordList::Cursor method with same prototype for
description.
.TP
.B   WordCursorOne(WordList *words, const WordKey &searchKey, wordlist_walk_callback_t callback, Object * callback_data)
Private constructor. See WordList::Cursor method with same prototype for
description.
.PP

.SH AUTHORS
Loic Dachary loic@gnu.org

The Ht://Dig group http://dev.htdig.org/


.SH SEE ALSO
htdb_dump(1), htdb_stat(1), htdb_load(1), mifluzdump(1), mifluzload(1), mifluzsearch(1), mifluzdict(1), WordContext(3), WordList(3), WordDict(3), WordListOne(3), WordKey(3), WordKeyInfo(3), WordType(3), WordDBInfo(3), WordRecordInfo(3), WordRecord(3), WordReference(3), WordCursor(3), WordMonitor(3), Configuration(3), mifluz(3)

