
'''
''' Part of the ht://Dig package   <http://www.htdig.org/>
''' Copyright (c) 1999, 2000, 2001 The ht://Dig Group
''' For copyright details, see the file COPYING in your distribution
''' or the GNU General Public License version 2 or later
''' <http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>
''' 
''' 
.TH WordKeyInfo 3 local
.SH NAME
WordKeyInfo \-
information on the key structure of the inverted index.


.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.ft CW

Helper for the WordKey class.
.ft R
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION

Describe the structure of the index key (
.I WordKey
).
The description includes the layout of the packed version
stored on disk.


.SH CONFIGURATION
For more information on the configuration attributes and a complete list of attributes, see the mifluz(3) manual page.
.TP
.B  wordlist_wordkey_description <desc> (no default)
Describe the structure of the inverted index key.
In the following explanation of the
.I <desc>
format,
mandatory words are
in bold and values that must be replaced in italic.


.B Word
.I bits/name bits
[/...]


The
.I name
is an alphanumerical symbolic name for the key field.
The
.I bits
is the number of bits required to store this field.
Note that all values are stored in unsigned integers (unsigned int).
Example:
.nf
.ft CW
Word 8/Document 16/Location 8
.ft R
.fi
.PP

.SH AUTHORS
Loic Dachary loic@gnu.org

The Ht://Dig group http://dev.htdig.org/


.SH SEE ALSO
htdb_dump(1), htdb_stat(1), htdb_load(1), mifluzdump(1), mifluzload(1), mifluzsearch(1), mifluzdict(1), WordContext(3), WordList(3), WordDict(3), WordListOne(3), WordKey(3), WordType(3), WordDBInfo(3), WordRecordInfo(3), WordRecord(3), WordReference(3), WordCursor(3), WordCursorOne(3), WordMonitor(3), Configuration(3), mifluz(3)

