
'''
''' Part of the ht://Dig package   <http://www.htdig.org/>
''' Copyright (c) 1999, 2000, 2001 The ht://Dig Group
''' For copyright details, see the file COPYING in your distribution
''' or the GNU General Public License version 2 or later
''' <http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>
''' 
''' 
.TH WordListOne 3 local
.SH NAME
WordListOne \-

manage and use an inverted index file.


.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.ft CW

#include <mifluz.h>

WordContext context;

WordList* words = context->List();
WordList* words = WordListOne(context)
.ft R
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION

WordList is the
.I mifluz
equivalent of a database handler. Each
WordList object is bound to an inverted index file and implements the
operations to create it, fill it with word occurrences and search 
for an entry matching a given criterion.

The general behavious of WordListOne is described in the WordList
manual page. It is prefered to create a WordListOne instance by
setting the
.I wordlist_multi
configuration parameter to false
and calling the
.B WordContext::List
method. 

Only the methods that differ from WordList are listed here.
All the methods of WordList are implemented by WordListOne and
you should refer to the manual page for more information.

The
.B Cursor
methods all return a WordCursorOne instance
cast to a WordCursor object.


.SH METHODS
.TP
.B   WordListOne(WordContext* ncontext)
Constructor. Build inverted index handling object using
run time configuration parameters listed in the
.B CONFIGURATION
section of the
.B WordList
manual page.
.TP
.B   int DeleteCursor(WordDBCursor& cursor) 
Delete the inverted index entry currently pointed to by the
.B cursor.
Returns 0 on success, Berkeley DB error code on error. This
is mainly useful when implementing a callback function for
a
.B WordCursor.
.PP

.SH AUTHORS
Loic Dachary loic@gnu.org

The Ht://Dig group http://dev.htdig.org/


.SH SEE ALSO
htdb_dump(1), htdb_stat(1), htdb_load(1), mifluzdump(1), mifluzload(1), mifluzsearch(1), mifluzdict(1), WordContext(3), WordList(3), WordDict(3), WordKey(3), WordKeyInfo(3), WordType(3), WordDBInfo(3), WordRecordInfo(3), WordRecord(3), WordReference(3), WordCursor(3), WordCursorOne(3), WordMonitor(3), Configuration(3), mifluz(3)

