=head1 NAME

C<gvpectrl> - GNU Virtual Private Ethernet Control Program

=head1 SYNOPSIS

C<gvpectrl> [B<-ckgs>] [B<--config=>I<DIR>] [B<--generate-keys>] [B<--help>]
[B<--kill>[B<=>I<SIGNAL>]] [B<--show-config>] [B<--version>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This is the control program for the C<gvpe>, the virtual private ethernet daemon.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<-c>, B<--config=>I<DIR>

Read configuration options from I<DIR>.

=item B<-g>, B<--generate-key=path>

Generates a single RSA key-pair. The public key will be stored in F<< I<path> >>
while the private key will be stored in F<< I<path> .privkey >>. Neither file must be
non-empty for this to succeed.

The public key file F<< I<path> >> is normally copied to F<pubkey/nodename> in
the config directory on all nodes, while the private key F<< I<path>.privkey >>
should be copied to the file F<hostkey> on the node the key is for.

It's recommended to generate the keypair on the node where it will be
used, so that the private key file does not have to travel over the
network.

=item B<-G>, B<--generate-keys>

Generate public/private RSA key-pairs for all nodes not having a key and exit.

Note that in normal configurations this will fail, as there cna only be
one private key per host. To make this configuration work you need to
specify separate keyfiles for hostkeys in your config file, e.g.:

   private-key = hostkeys/%s

Such a configuration makes it easier to distribute a configuration
centrally but requires private keys to be transported securely over the
network.

=item B<-q>, B<--quiet>

Suppresses messages the author finds nonessential for scripting purposes.

=item B<--help>

Display short list of options.

=item B<--kill>[B<=>I<SIGNAL>]

Attempt to kill a running C<gvpectrl> (optionally with the specified
I<SIGNAL> instead of C<SIGTERM>) and exit.

=item B<--show-config>

Show a summary of the configuration, and how gvpe interprets it. Can also be very useful
when designing firewall scripts.

=item B<--version>

Output version information and exit.

=back

=head1 BUGS

If you find any bugs, report them to C<gvpe@schmorp.de>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

gvpe(5), gvpe.conf(5), gvpe(8).

GVPE comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY.  This is free software, and you are
welcome to redistribute it under certain conditions; see the file COPYING
for details.

=head1 AUTHOR

Marc Lehmann C<< <gvpe@schmorp.de> >>.

